a landmark legal case over a devastating
War Israel gets taken to court on
charges of genocide in
Gaza chaos in Guan K gang violence in
Ecuador live on
TV and tens of thousands killed Millions
displaced why is the story in Sudan not
in the
headlines
the international court of justice has
concluded its preliminary hearing in the
ha on South Africa's genocide case
against Israel the icj judges are now
deliberating over whether or not they
will order an immediate ceasefire in
Gaza for the global media this case will
or at least should govern how this story
is reported what kind of terminology
should apply if the un's highest court
suspects Israel of carrying out a
genocide side then who are journalists
to say otherwise by continuing to
describe the utter Carnage in water down
terms geopolitically the stakes could
not be higher because a ruling against
South Africa signals to the world that
what we have witnessed over these past 3
months in Gaza the collective punishment
and indiscriminate bombardment of
civilians is permissible in the eyes of
the icj but a ruling in favor of South
Africa will let Israel and its powerful
backers know that when it comes to
genocide no one not even Israel and its
American Allies is above the
law this is a potentially pivotal legal
case one laced with historical
irony the government of South Africa the
country that invented apartheid taking
Israel which still practices apartheid
to the international court of justice
accusing it of genocide in Gaza the
first genocide in history where its
victims are broadcasting their own
destruction in real time in the
desperate so far vain hope that the
world might do something South Africa's
lawyers chose their words carefully the
challenge facing Israel's lawyers is
that since October 7th Israeli leaders
have not we will exact a price that will
be remembered by them and Israel's other
enemies for decades to come the
difficulty Israel are facing is that
every single day there are more and more
statements uh that are genocidal
including the increasing talk about not
only the ethnic cleansing of gazans but
also bringing Jewish settlers in
Gaza we hear about the elimination of
the population from Gaza raising the
different cities and towns to the ground
and then building honorable new
settlements that are Jewish all the
genocidal rhetoric that has come out why
was that allowed to be AED to
proliferate if indeed this was totally
out of sync with the intentions of the
Israeli state it behooves you to clamp
down on that that was not
done
in fact something else happened which is
only after Israel realized the
international court of justice is a
serious thing that they will have to
contend with then you suddenly see the
order going around sh keep quiet don't
say that stuff
anymore and if you have said that kind
of stuff walk it back Israel is fighting
Hamas terrorists not the Palestinian
population which is what the Netanyahu
government was doing right up until the
day before the hearing but all those
previous statements inflammatory ones by
Israeli officials matter because as
stipulated in the genocide convention
passed by the UN in 1948 Declarations of
intent are evidence it's an entire
nation out there that is responsible
it's not true this rhetoric about
civilians not not aware not inol it's
absolutely not true so Israel has tried
to roll back the clock to October 7th
but I am obliged to put before the court
today some small fragment of the scenes
of unfathomable cruelty showing the icj
judges some of the same images of
hamas's gruesome attacks that it showed
journalists foreign governments and the
UN that may have proven effective in the
court of public opinion but it does not
constitute a legal defense for for what
has happened since propaganda does not
work in a court of law for while Israel
will argue to the court that Hamas
attack on uh uh Israel on October 7
amounted to genocide of its own sort
regardless of an attack on a state's
territory no matter how atrocious it
does not justify
genocide the fact that Israel has landed
at the icj in the ha by way of South
Africa has to do with two countries with
similar histories and shared experiences
of Oppression we are also particularly
mindful of Israel's institutionalized
regime of discriminatory laws subjecting
the Palestinian people to apartate on
both apartheid era South Africa and
Israel were both highly militarized
countries with societies that were
racially segregated both were political
Paras isolated by their neighbors Israel
needed oil South Africa provided it
South Africa faced with an arms embargo
needed weapons Israel helped Supply them
the respective resistance groups thec
and the PLO forged an alliance of their
own given that history ANC leaders have
always backed the Palestinians as Nelson
Mandela did from the moment he came out
of prison such as in this encounter with
the US Network ABC in
1990 you've met over the last six months
three times with gaser Arafat are these
your models of leaders of Human Rights
one of the
mistakes which some political analysts
make is to think that their
enemies should be our
enemies from the get-go in this current
uh situation in Gaza South Africa has
been completely Pro Palestinian now
there's a moral claim that thec and the
South African government sees the gazans
and the Palestinians more generally as
being part of the oppressed group of
people in the world they're involved in
a struggle against colonialism and
therefore to some extent it's seen
through the same lens as a struggle
against a parate the anc's support for
the people of Palestine did not start an
end with former president Nelson Mandela
that solidarity and support continued
under the era of tabuni under the AA of
former president Jacob Zuma and we see
it unfold um under the presidency of C
ramapa South Africa has historically
stated that Israel is forced
resettlements its um mass incarceration
of Palestinian people is reminiscent of
the apath regime in South Africa from a
more cynical point of view we're going
into an election year in South Africa in
the next few months and thec is
determined to deflect and distract
attention from its multiple domestic
failures this icj case is an opportunity
for South Africa to reclaim the moral
High ground and so I think there's a
combination of struggle history deep
cynicism and to a degree opportunism
behind the South African
case if the judges rule against Israel
and Order its bombing of Gaza to stop
while the court determines if this war
is in fact genocidal the legal
implications would apply not just to the
Netanyahu government but to all
countries that are signatories to the
un's genocide convention for failing in
their legal duty to prevent that
genocide moreover media Outlets
everywhere would be robbed of any excuse
they have conjured up to avoid calling
this story what it is instead of
labeling it the way humanitarian groups
and various NOS have as a genocide in
progress they have minced their words
resorted to euphemisms and
mischaracterizations that reflect the
language of their governments not the
reality on the ground happening this is
a genocide happening in front of our
eyes we have we that word is as you know
incredibly emotive and the Israelis as
you know will be saying that they are
targeting Hamas only that they don't
Target will South Africa's case against
Israel have a gamechanging effect on the
news narrative because it could use one
so the inter of Justice rule that there
is a risk of genocide this will also put
on notice and to shame all of those who
have supported uncritically the war in
the last 3 months whether it's States
like the US the EU or the media in the
west that have been promoting supporting
aiding and abetting genocide in Gaza so
hopefully this kind of ruling would
prompt
a critical self-reflection on the part
of the western media as well as a change
of course on the part of uh Western
governments a lot of the media coverage
has been through the lens of retaliation
that Israel was acting in self-defense
to what happened on October 7 but if the
icj makes a finding that Israel is now a
suspect in a genocide case it changes
that lens and it changes the narrative
and that shifts things geopolitically in
many ways it's just worth stepping back
for a moment and not giving a free pass
to the Israeli media you have literally
had people sitting in TV studios as
expert analysts and commentators saying
I think we should have killed 100,000 in
the first few
days and I remember Rwanda
and the way actually the media played
that role and they were gone after as
well so the media is not on
trial in the court but we shouldn't give
them a free pass either 20 countries
have now stepped up to back South Africa
putting their names to the case against
Israel not one of them is from the West
for all their talk of Western values all
their moralizing not a single so-called
leader in North America or Europe has
supported what analysts agree is the
best chance to secure a ceasefire to
save Palestinian lives history will
judge them accordingly come the time
those writing their obituaries should do
the
same Ecuador has been in a state of
emergency for the past week as the
government there battle an epidemic of
drug gang violence one of the most
shocking scenes came from a TV station
that was stormed by gunman T NAFA is
here with more Richard what viewers of
Ecuador's TC television saw on Tuesday
was like something out of a narco
Thriller Mass gang members breaking into
the studio in the middle of a news
broadcast armed with guns and explosives
firing at journalists and taking
hostages the police put an end to the
attack before it went any further but
the Breakin was only the most visible
case in this latest escalation of gang
violence in Ecuador it began last Sunday
when one of the country's most notorious
gang leaders escaped from his jail cell
triggering uprisings in multiple
Ecuadorian prisons where guards were
held hostage and reportedly even
murdered by prisoners since then gang
violence has killed at least 10 people
the country's newly elected president
Daniel naboa has declared a 60-day state
of emergency saying that the country is
fighting Narco terrorism and a tough
stance on criminal gangs was a core
piece of nao's election platform but
it's been an uphill struggle earlier on
in the campaign nebo's opponent was
assassinated just days after pledging a
war on criminal gangs and as the attack
on TC television made clear media
Outlets covering the story are also
targets death threats against
journalists are common and several
broadcasters have been sent explosive
devices that has intimidated many
reporters into silence on this story
thanks TK moving on now to Sudan where
the Civil War and resulting humanitarian
crisis continue unabated and largely
underreported news audiences may
remember the images from the capital
city carum from April of last year when
fighting erupted between two factions of
Sudan military hun since then this
conflict has engulfed most of the
country claiming more than 10,000 lives
displacing an estimated 7 million
sudanes the international media however
are no longer paying close attention a
lack of interest that began long before
what happened on October 7th getting
this story out to the world are Sudanese
journalists inside the country and
abroad people like Ismael kushkush a
Sudanese American writer who left carum
just as the war broke out and Yasmin
abdal Majid an author broadcaster and
editor at the website eyes on Sudan the
listening post spoke with both of them
on Sudan's year of Crisis and why the
news media have failed to convey the
scale of this
story so do you feel like the story of
Sudan has been
forgotten H the story of Sudan looking
back from the end of 2023 is one that I
find really dispiriting actually the
that I left that I last saw in 2020 will
never exist again not only are we
dealing as Sudanese people with this
with the weight of the country
collapsing but it's also having to deal
with it in relative silence in an
international media context where there
are other Wars that people are paying
more attention to and it feels like the
sudes people are mourning and grieving
Alone 7 million people have been
displaced over a million people are now
refugees in neighboring countries the
amount of death uh that has been
recorded uh according to un numbers um
at least 10,000 probably higher so I
think we we do have one of the
largest um catastrophes of of last year
still unfolding and still
ongoing this time 5 years ago we were
witnessing the beginning of protests
that would hail the end of the Bashir
regim Reports say that Sudan's military
has forced president Omar Al Basher to
step down ending 30 years of rule and
there was this real period of
excitement it felt like ah finally we
were going to to be known for something
apart from a genocide in that for apart
from the longest Civil War on the
African continent Sudan's December
Revolution really um caught the world's
attention as one of the most outstanding
largely
nonviolent uh movement in in recent
decades um it provided images that I
thought were very Unforgettable many in
the world will um remember the image of
Alat Salah the Young sudane woman who
mounted a car raised her hand dressed in
a traditional Sudanese
[Applause]
Tobe the one image that that for me that
remained in my mind of that era really
was April 6th a few days before the
removal of Al Bashir was to see the
amount of protesters uh in front of the
Army Headquarters I thought that was a
game Cher to me that signaled that the
end um of of of government was
[Music]
near during this transitional period um
After the revolution of of 2019 I think
uh you could look at it and see this
kind of Game of Thrones like situation
between two components of the military
establishment they then you know turned
against each other and that's what we
saw in April 2023 fighter jets circling
overhead firing
missiles gunfire interrupting a live
television broadcast the two main
belligerant as we like to call them are
HTI who's the head of the rapid support
forces and Boran who's the head of the
Sudanese Armed Forces both HTI and Boran
worked together in 2021 to overthrow the
transitional Council and declare that
they were protecting the revolution of
course they were not it was about
returning Sudan to a
military autocratic regime once the two
generals overthrew the the civilian Le
government then it became well who's
going to be the top
dog the rapid support forces that are
this irregular paramilitary militia
essentially that came out of the Jed the
jeds which roughly translates to Devils
on Horseback were responsible for the
genocide and D 4 that happened 20 years
ago in some ways the easy story is to
say that it is a tale of two generals or
a tale of two belligerant I myself use
that framing sometimes because it felt
like a way to quickly talk about what
was going on but of course that's that's
only The Superficial Story the real
story is about a challenge that Sudan
has faced B over the the decades since
Independence and that is how do you
govern a country like Sudan without
being a
general people have lots of different
ideas for why Sudan doesn't get the
attention internationally that other
conflicts
do part of it is because it's in Africa
and and honestly it is the fact that in
the international media stories of
conflict in Africa aren't seen as that
interesting they're seen as part of the
course another reason I think really
does contribute to the lack of
international media is the challenge for
journalists on the ground in 2022 there
was about a, 1,100 journalists working
in Sudan and this was a great moment
actually because under the Bashir uh
regime journalists were really really
suppressed a recent report that came out
of a UNESCO supported um survey said
that about 90% of those journalists are
unemployed now the displacement of
sudanes that has come with the the War
uh includes of course journalists and
their families according to a recent
report by reporters Without Borders uh
26 newspapers have stopped production 10
radio stations have stopped the news
coming out of of Sudan by Sudanese
journalist has taken a hit and that
includes journalists who normally work
with International media Outlets ground
producers fixers translators Freelancers
but there are of course some new
Sudanese news outlets that I think they
are still doing some good work radio
Danga has become really an important uh
source of information Sudan tbun of
course these are news outlets that have
um bases outside of Sudan so I think
that the role uh of the the diaspora
does play an important role um in
covering um there's quite a lot of
pressure on those particular journalists
to communicate what is happening to the
world especially those who are reporting
in English I mean there's there's the
case of Y who was doing a report on
displaced people in Port Sudan who ended
up seeing one of her relatives in the in
the crowd and as the crowd
Parts but that's my uncle that's my
uncle
it really sums up the challenge for
journalists in Sudan trying also to
report to the rest of the world it's not
just a distanced thing it's not just a
theoretical story and as we enter 2024
um we we've starting to see a trickling
of U interest in Sudan again trying to
keep attention to what is happening in
Sudan is something that's important
especially that many of us think that as
bad as the situation is in Sudan it
still can get worse
it is moving into a situation where
Sudan could easily become what Somalia
and Afghanistan were in the 90s um a
complete collapse of the state and I
think that would just simply be a
disaster situation I spend a lot of my
time feeling like I'm in two selves
there's a self that lives in London that
is physically safe that has coffee with
my husband in the morning and there's
the self that is in the conflict that is
watching the news that is seeing the
images of you know babies dying in
orphanages left alone because nobody's
there to save them of women that
describe awful abuses that have been
visited on their bodies and also feeling
this pressure to really do something
about it because that responsibility is
real and I think there is some sense
whether it's asper saviorism mentality
whether it's you know the idea that that
we want to be able to just fix it but
you have to be able to just focus on
what is within your control who are the
individual people you can help who what
are the individual stories you can share
that will that will move the needle if
all it is today is sending a message to
every single one of your family and
checking that they're alive that's
important too that has a place
too in closing frequent viewers of our
program will have noted that that peace
on Sudan and our previous mention of the
situation in Ecuador are the first
stories we have done since October 7th
that have not been about Israel's war on
Gaza and we still have some more
catching up to do on developments in
other countries and regions stories rich
in media angles the kind that we've
covered in the more than 15 years of
doing this show that is not to say
though that we're turning our back on
the Gaza story we'll stay on it from the
court case in the ha to the devastation
on the ground and all of the
geopolitical aspects we're not moving on
just trying to keep up with the rest of
the world we'll see you next time here
at the listening
post